# Glossary {#glossary}

**abandonware**<a id="abandonware"></a>
:   Software that is no longer being maintained.

**absolute error**<a id="absolute_error"></a>
:   The absolute value of the difference between the observed and the correct value. Absolute error is usually less useful than [relative error](#relative_error). See also: [relative error](#relative_error)

**absolute import**<a id="absolute_import"></a>
:   In Python, an import that specifies the full location of the file to be imported.

**absolute path**<a id="absolute_path"></a>
:   A path that points to the same location in the filesystem regardless of where it's evaluated. An absolute path is the equivalent of latitude and longitude in geography. See also: [relative path](#relative_path)

**actual result (of test)**<a id="actual_result"></a>
:   The value generated by running code in a test. If this matches the [expected_result](#expected_result), the test [passes](#pass_test); if the two are different, the test [fails](#fail_test).

**agile development**<a id="agile"></a>
:   A software development methodology that emphasizes lots of small steps and continuous feedback instead of up-front planning and long-term scheduling. [Exploratory programming](#exploratory_programming) is often agile.

**ally**<a id="ally"></a>
:   Someone who actively promotes and supports inclusivity.

**append mode**<a id="append_mode"></a>
:   To add data to the end of an existing file instead of overwriting the previous contents of that file.  Overwriting is the default, so most programming languages require programs to be explicit about wanting to append instead.

**assertion**<a id="assertion"></a>
:   A [Boolean](#boolean) expression that must be true at a certain point in a program.  Assertions may be built into the language (e.g., Python's `assert` statement) or provided as functions (e.g., R's `stopifnot`). They are often used in testing, but are also put in [production code](#production_code) to check that it is behaving correctly.

**authentic task**<a id="authentic_task"></a>
:   A task which contains important elements of things that learners would do in real (non-classroom situations).

**auto-completion**<a id="auto_completion"></a>
:   A feature that allows the user to finish a word or code quickly through the use of hitting the TAB key to list possible words or code that the user can select from.

**automatic variable**<a id="automatic_variable"></a>
:   A variable that is automatically given a value in a [build rule](#build_rule).  For example, Make automatically assigns the name of a rule's [target](#build_target) to the automatic variable `$@`.  Automatic variables are frequently used when writing [pattern rules](#pattern_rule).

**boilerplate**<a id="boilerplate"></a>
:   Standard text that is included in legal contracts, licenses, and so on.

**branch-per-feature workflow**<a id="branch_per_feature_workflow"></a>
:   A common strategy for managing work with [Git](#git) and other [version control systems](#version_control_system) in which a separate [branch](#git_branch) is created for work on each new feature or each bug fix and merged when that work is completed.  This isolates changes from one another until they are completed.

**bug report**<a id="bug_report"></a>
:   A collection of files, logs, or related information that describes either an unexpected output of some code or program or an unexpected error or warning. This information is used to help find and fix a bug in the program or code.

**bug tracker**<a id="bug_tracker"></a>
:   A system that tracks and manages [reported bugs](#bug_report) for a software program, to make it easier to address and fix the bugs.

**build manager**<a id="build_manager"></a>
:   A program that keeps track of how files depend on one another and runs commands to update any files that are out of date.  Build managers were invented to [compile](#compile) only those parts of programs that had changed, but are now often used to implement workflows in which plots depend on result files, which in turn depend on raw data files or configuration files. See also: [build rule](#build_rule), [Makefile](#makefile)

**build recipe**<a id="build_recipe"></a>
:   The part of a [build rule](#build_rule) that describes how to update something that has fallen out of date.

**build rule**<a id="build_rule"></a>
:   A specification for a [build manager](#build_manager) that describes how some files depend on others and what to do if those files are out of date.

**build target**<a id="build_target"></a>
:   The file(s) that a [build rule](#build_rule) will update if they are out of date compared to their [dependencies](#dependency). See also: [Makefile](#makefile)

**byte code**<a id="byte_code"></a>
:   A set of instructions designed to be executed efficiently by an [interpreter](#interpreter).

**call stack**<a id="call_stack"></a>
:   A data structure that stores information about the active subroutines executed. `cst()` is a useful function provided in the `lobstr` package to visualize a call stack.

**camel case**<a id="camel_case"></a>
:   A style of writing code that involves naming variables and objects with no space, underscore (`_`), dot (`.`), or dash (`-`), with each word being capitalized.  Examples include `CalculateSum` and `findPattern`.

**catch (an exception)**<a id="catch_exception"></a>
:   To accept responsibility for handling an error or other unexpected event. R prefers "handling a condition" to "catching an exception".

**checklist**<a id="checklist"></a>
:   A list of things to be checked or completed when doing a task.

**command-line interface**<a id="cli"></a>
:   A user interface that relies solely on text for commands and output, typically running in a [shell](#shell).

**code coverage (in testing)**<a id="code_coverage"></a>
:   How much of a library or program is executed when tests run. This is normally reported as a percentage of lines of code: for example, if 40 out of 50 lines in a file are run during testing, those tests have 80% code coverage.

**code review**<a id="code_review"></a>
:   To check a program or a change to a program by inspecting its source code.

**cognitive load**<a id="cognitive_load"></a>
:   The amount of working memory needed to accomplish a set of simultaneous tasks.

**command-line argument**<a id="command_line_argument"></a>
:   A filename or control flag given to a command-line program when it is run.

**command line flag**<a id="command_line_flag"></a>
:   See [command-line argument](#command_line_argument)

**command line option**<a id="command_line_option"></a>
:   See [command-line argument](#command_line_argument)

**command line switch**<a id="command_line_switch"></a>
:   See [command-line argument](#command_line_argument)

**comment**<a id="comment"></a>
:   Text written in a script that is not treated as code to be run, but rather as text that describes what the code is doing. These are usually short notes, often beginning with a `#` (in many programming languages).

**commit**<a id="commit"></a>
:   As a verb, the act of saving a set of changes to a database or version control [repository](#repository). As a noun, the changes saved.

**commit message**<a id="commit_message"></a>
:   A comment attached to a [commit](#commit) that explains what was done and why.

**commons**<a id="commons"></a>
:   Something managed jointly by a community according to rules they themselves have evolved and adopted.

**competent practitioner**<a id="competent_practitioner"></a>
:   Someone who can do normal tasks with normal effort under normal circumstances. See also: [novice](#novice), [expert](#expert)

**compiled language**<a id="compiled_language"></a>
:   Originally, a language such as C or Fortran that is translated into machine instructions for execution. Languages such as Java are also compiled before execution, but into [byte code](#byte_code) instead of machine instructions, while languages like Python are compiled to byte code on the fly.

**compiler**<a id="compiler"></a>
:   An application that translates programs written in some languages into machine instructions or [byte code](#byte_code).

**computational notebook**<a id="computational_notebook"></a>
:   A combination of a document format that allows users to mix prose and code in a single file, and an application that executes that code interactively and in place. The Jupyter Notebook and R Markdown files are both examples of computational notebooks.

**conditional expression**<a id="conditional_expression"></a>
:   A [ternary expression](#ternary_expression) that serves the role of an if/else statement. For example, C and similar languages use the syntax `test : ifTrue ? ifFalse` to mean "choose the value `ifTrue` if `test` is true, or the value `ifFalse` if it is not".

**confirmation bias**<a id="confirmation_bias"></a>
:   The tendency to analyze information or make decisions in ways that reinforce existing beliefs.

**continuation prompt**<a id="continuation_prompt"></a>
:   FIXME

**continuous integration**<a id="continuous_integration"></a>
:   FIXME

**current working directory**<a id="current_working_directory"></a>
:   The folder or directory location that the program is operating in. Any action taken by the program occurs relative to this directory.

**data package**<a id="data_package"></a>
:   A software package that, mostly, contains only data. Is used to make it simpler to disseminate data for easier use.

**default target**<a id="default_target"></a>
:   FIXME

**defensive programming**<a id="defensive_programming"></a>
:   FIXME

**destructuring assignment**<a id="destructuring_assignment"></a>
:   FIXME

**dictionary**<a id="dictionary"></a>
:   FIXME

**docstring**<a id="docstring"></a>
:   FIXME

**documentation generator**<a id="documentation_generator"></a>
:   FIXME

**Digital Object Identifier**<a id="doi"></a>
:   FIXME

**down-vote**<a id="down_vote"></a>
:   FIXME

**entry point**<a id="entry_point"></a>
:   Where a program or function starts executing, or the first commands in a file that run.

**exception**<a id="exception"></a>
:   An object that stores information about an error or other unusual event in a program. One part of a program will create and [raise an exception](#raise_exception) to signal that something unexpected has happened; another part will [catch](#catch_exception) it.

**expected result**<a id="expected_result"></a>
:   FIXME

**expert**<a id="expert"></a>
:   Someone who can diagnose and handle unusual situations, knows when the usual rules do not apply, and tends to recognize solutions rather than reasoning to them. See also: [competent practitioner](#competent_practitioner), [novice](#novice)

**explicit relative import**<a id="explicit_relative_import"></a>
:   In Python, an import that specifies a path relative to the current location.

**exploratory programming**<a id="exploratory_programming"></a>
:   FIXME

**export a variable**<a id="export_variable"></a>
:   To make a variable defined inside a [shell script](#shell_script) available outside that script.

**external error**<a id="external_error"></a>
:   An error caused by something outside a program, such as trying to open a file that doesn't exist.

**false beginner**<a id="false_beginner"></a>
:   Someone whose previous knowledge allows them to learn (or re-learn) something more quickly.  False beginners start at the same point as true beginners (i.e., a pre-test will show the same proficiency) but can move much more quickly.

**Frequently Asked Questions**<a id="faq"></a>
:   FIXME

**feature request**<a id="feature_request"></a>
:   A request to the maintainers or developers of a software program to add a specific functionality (a feature) to that program.

**filename extension**<a id="filename_extension"></a>
:   FIXME

**filename stem**<a id="filename_stem"></a>
:   FIXME

**filesystem**<a id="filesystem"></a>
:   Controls how files are stored and retrieved on disk by an operating system. Also used to refer to the disk that is used to store the files or the type of the filesystem.

**filter**<a id="filter"></a>
:   To choose a set of [records](#record) (i.e., rows of a table) based on the values they contain.

**fixture**<a id="fixture"></a>
:   FIXME

**flag variable**<a id="flag_variable"></a>
:   A variable that changes state exactly once to show that something has happened that needs to be dealt with later.

**folder**<a id="folder"></a>
:   FIXME

**forge**<a id="forge"></a>
:   A website that integrates [version control](#version_control), [issue tracking](#issue_tracking_system), and other tools for software development.

**full identifier (of commit)**<a id="full_identifier_git"></a>
:   FIXME

**Git**<a id="git"></a>
:   A version control tool to record and manage changes to a project.

**Git branch**<a id="git_branch"></a>
:   A snapshot of a version of a Git repository. Multiple branches can capture multiple versions of the same repository.

**Git clone**<a id="git_clone"></a>
:   Copies (and usually downloads) a Git [remote repository](#remote_repository) onto the local computer.

**Git conflict**<a id="git_conflict"></a>
:   FIXME

**Git fork**<a id="git_fork"></a>
:   FIXME

**Git merge**<a id="git_merge"></a>
:   Merging branches in Git incorporates development histories of two branches in one. If changes are made to similar parts of the branches on both branches a commit will occur and this must be resolved before the merge will be completed.

**Git pull**<a id="git_pull"></a>
:   Downloads and synchronizes changes between a [remote repository](#remote_repository) and a local [repository](#repository).

**Git push**<a id="git_push"></a>
:   Uploads and synchronizes changes between a local [repository](#repository) and a [remote repository](#remote_repository).

**Git stage**<a id="git_stage"></a>
:   To put changes in a "holding area" from which they can be [committed](#commit).

**governance**<a id="governance"></a>
:   The process by which an organization manages itself, or the rules used to do so.

**GNU Public License**<a id="gpl"></a>
:   A license that allows people to re-use software as long as they distribute the source of their changes.

**graphical user interface**<a id="gui"></a>
:   FIXME

**hitchhiker**<a id="hitchhiker"></a>
:   FIXME

**home directory**<a id="home_directory"></a>
:   FIXME

**impact/effort matrix**<a id="impact_effort_matrix"></a>
:   A tool for prioritizing work in which every task is placed according to its importance and the effort required to complete it.

**implicit relative import**<a id="implicit_relative_import"></a>
:   In Python, an import that does not specify a path (and hence may be ambiguous).

**impostor syndrome**<a id="impostor_syndrome"></a>
:   FIXME

**in-place operator**<a id="in_place_operator"></a>
:   FIXME

**inspectability**<a id="inspectability"></a>
:   The degree to which a third party can figure out what was done and why. Work can be [reproducible](#reproducibility) without being inspectable.

**integration testing**<a id="integration_testing"></a>
:   FIXME

**internal error**<a id="internal_error"></a>
:   An error caused by a fault in a program, such as trying to access elements beyond the end of an array.

**interpeter**<a id="interpeter"></a>
:   FIXME

**interpreted language**<a id="interpreted_language"></a>
:   A high-level language that is not executed directly by the computer, but instead is run by an [interpreter](#interpreter) that translates program instructions into machine commands on the fly.

**interruption bingo**<a id="interruption_bingo"></a>
:   A technique for managing interruptions in meetings. Everyone's name is placed on each row and each column of a grid; each time person A interrupts person B, a mark is added to the appropriate grid cell.

**invariant**<a id="invariant"></a>
:   FIXME

**ISO date format**<a id="iso_date_format"></a>
:   FIXME

**issue**<a id="issue"></a>
:   FIXME

**label (an issue)**<a id="issue_label"></a>
:   FIXME

**issue tracking system**<a id="issue_tracking_system"></a>
:   Is similar to a [bug tracking system](#bug_tracker) in that it tracks "issues" made to a [repository](#repository), usually in the form of [feature requests](#feature_request), [bug reports](#bug_report), or some other todo item.

**JavaScript Object Notation**<a id="json"></a>
:   A way to represent data by combining basic values like numbers and character strings in lists and name/value structures. The acronym stands for "JavaScript Object Notation"; unlike better-defined standards like [XML](#xml), it is unencumbered by a syntax for comments or ways to define a [schema](#schema).

**kebab case**<a id="kebab_case"></a>
:   FIXME

**LaTeX**<a id="latex"></a>
:   The FORTRAN of scientific publishing.

**linter**<a id="linter"></a>
:   FIXME

**list comprehension**<a id="list_comprehension"></a>
:   FIXME

**logging framework**<a id="logging_framework"></a>
:   FIXME

**long option**<a id="long_option"></a>
:   FIXME

**loop body**<a id="loop_body"></a>
:   FIXME

**magic number**<a id="magic_number"></a>
:   FIXME

**Makefile**<a id="makefile"></a>
:   FIXME

**Martha's Rules**<a id="marthas_rules"></a>
:   FIXME

**mental model**<a id="mental_model"></a>
:   A simplified representation of the key elements and relationships of some problem domain that is good enough to support problem solving.

**milestone**<a id="milestone"></a>
:   FIXME

**MIT License**<a id="mit_license"></a>
:   A license that allows people to re-use software with no restrictions.

**Nano (editor)**<a id="nano_editor"></a>
:   FIXME

**non-governmental organization**<a id="ngo"></a>
:   An organization that is not affiliated with the government, but does the sorts of public service work that governments often do.

**novice**<a id="novice"></a>
:   Someone who has not yet built a usable mental model of a domain. See also: [competent practitioner](#competent_practitioner), [expert](#expert)

**object-oriented programming**<a id="oop"></a>
:   FIXME

**open license**<a id="open_license"></a>
:   FIXME

**open science**<a id="open_science"></a>
:   FIXME

**operating system**<a id="operating_system"></a>
:   FIXME

**oppression**<a id="oppression"></a>
:   A form of injustice in which one social group is marginalized or deprived while another is [privileged](#privilege).

**optional argument**<a id="optional_argument"></a>
:   An argument to a function or a command that may be omitted.

**orthogonality**<a id="orthogonality"></a>
:   FIXME

**overlay configuration**<a id="overlay_configuration"></a>
:   A technique for configuring programs in which several layers of configuration are used, each overriding settings in the ones before.

**pager**<a id="pager"></a>
:   FIXME

**parent directory**<a id="parent_directory"></a>
:   FIXME

**patch**<a id="patch"></a>
:   FIXME

**path (in filesystem)**<a id="path"></a>
:   FIXME

**path coverage**<a id="path_coverage"></a>
:   The fraction of possible execution paths in a piece of software that have been executed by tests. Software can have complete [code coverage](#code_coverage) without having complete path coverage.

**pattern rule**<a id="pattern_rule"></a>
:   FIXME

**phony target**<a id="phony_target"></a>
:   FIXME

**pipe (in the Unix shell)**<a id="pipe_shell"></a>
:   FIXME

**positional argument**<a id="positional_argument"></a>
:   FIXME

**postcondition**<a id="postcondition"></a>
:   Something that is guaranteed to be true after a piece of software finishes executing. See also: [invariant](#invariant), [precondition](#precondition)

**pothole case**<a id="pothole_case"></a>
:   FIXME

**power law**<a id="power_law"></a>
:   A mathematical relationship in which one quantity changes in proportion to a constant raised to the power of another quantity.

**precondition**<a id="precondition"></a>
:   Something that must be true before a piece of software runs in order for that software to run correctly. See also: [invariant](#invariant), [postcondition](#postcondition)

**prerequisite**<a id="prerequisite"></a>
:   FIXME

**privilege**<a id="privilege"></a>
:   An unearned advantage, typically as a result of belonging to a dominant social class or group.

**procedural programming**<a id="procedural_programming"></a>
:   FIXME

**process**<a id="process"></a>
:   FIXME

**product manager**<a id="product_manager"></a>
:   FIXME

**project manager**<a id="project_manager"></a>
:   FIXME

**prompt**<a id="prompt"></a>
:   FIXME

**provenance**<a id="provenance"></a>
:   FIXME

**pull request**<a id="pull_request"></a>
:   The request to merge a new feature or correction created on a user's fork of a [Git](#git) repository into the [upstream repository](#upstream_repository). The developer will be notified of the change, review it, make or suggest changes, and potentially merge it.

**raise (an exception)**<a id="raise_exception"></a>
:   To signal that something unexpected or unusual has happened in a program by creating an [exception](#exception) and handing it to the error-handling system, which then tries to find a point in the program that will [catch](#catch_exception) it.

**raster image**<a id="raster_image"></a>
:   FIXME

**recursion**<a id="recursion"></a>
:   FIXME

**redirection**<a id="redirection"></a>
:   FIXME

**refactoring**<a id="refactoring"></a>
:   FIXME

**regression testing**<a id="regression_testing"></a>
:   FIXME

**regular expression**<a id="regular_expression"></a>
:   A pattern for matching text, written as text itself. Regular expressions are sometimes called "regexp", "regex", or "RE", and are as powerful as they are cryptic.

**relative error**<a id="relative_error"></a>
:   The absolute value of the difference between the actual and correct value divided by the desired value. For example, if the actual value is 9 and the correct value is 10, the relative error is 0.1. Relative error is usually more useful than [absolute error](#absolute_error).

**relative path**<a id="relative_path"></a>
:   A path whose destination is interpreted relative to some other location, such as the [current working directory](#current_working_directory). A relative path is the equivalent of giving directions using terms like "straight" and "left". See also: [absolute path](#absolute_path)

**remote login**<a id="remote_login"></a>
:   FIXME

**remote login server**<a id="remote_login_server"></a>
:   A process that handles requests to log in to a computer from other computers. See also: [ssh daemon](#ssh_daemon)

**remote repository**<a id="remote_repository"></a>
:   FIXME

**read-eval-print loop**<a id="repl"></a>
:   An interactive program that reads a command typed in by a user, executes it, prints the result, and then waits patiently for the next command. REPLs are often used to explore new ideas or for debugging.

**repository**<a id="repository"></a>
:   A place where a [version control system](#version_control_system) stores the files that make up a project and the metadata that describes their history. See also: [Git](#git)

**reprex**<a id="reprex"></a>
:   A reproducible example. When asking questions about coding problems online or filing issues on GitHub, you should always include a reprex so others can reproduce your problem and help. The [reprex](https://github.com/tidyverse/reprex) package can help!

**reproducible research**<a id="reproducible_research"></a>
:   The practice of escribing and documenting research results in such a way that another researcher or person can re-run the analysis code on the exact data to obtain the same result.

**reStructured Text**<a id="restructured_text"></a>
:   FIXME

**revision**<a id="revision"></a>
:   FIXME

**root directory**<a id="root_directory"></a>
:   The directory that contains everything else, directly or indirectly. The root directory is written `/` (a bare forward slash).

**rotating file**<a id="rotating_file"></a>
:   FIXME

**research software engineer**<a id="rse"></a>
:   FIXME

**script**<a id="script"></a>
:   Originally, a program written in a language too usable for "real" programmers to take seriously; the term is now synonymous with program.

**search path**<a id="search_path"></a>
:   FIXME

**semantic versioning**<a id="semantic_versioning"></a>
:   FIXME

**shebang**<a id="shebang"></a>
:   FIXME

**shell script**<a id="shell_script"></a>
:   FIXME

**short circuit test**<a id="short_circuit_test"></a>
:   A logical test that only evaluates as many arguments as it needs to. For example, if `A` is false, then most languages never evaluate `B` in the expression `A and B`.

**short identifier (of commit)**<a id="short_identifier_git"></a>
:   FIXME

**short option**<a id="short_option"></a>
:   FIXME

**snake case**<a id="snake_case"></a>
:   FIXME

**source distribution**<a id="source_distribution"></a>
:   FIXME

**sprint**<a id="sprint"></a>
:   FIXME

**Secure Shell**<a id="ssh"></a>
:   FIXME

**ssh daemon**<a id="ssh_daemon"></a>
:   A [remote login server](#remote_login_server) that handles [SSH](#ssh) connections.

**SSH key**<a id="ssh_key"></a>
:   FIXME

**SSH protocol**<a id="ssh_protocol"></a>
:   A formal standard for exchanging encrypted messages between computers and for managing [remote logins](#remote_login_server).

**standard error**<a id="stderr"></a>
:   FIXME

**standard input**<a id="stdin"></a>
:   FIXME

**standard output**<a id="stdout"></a>
:   FIXME

**stop word**<a id="stop_word"></a>
:   Common words that are filtered out of text before processing it, such as "the" and "an".

**subcommand**<a id="subcommand"></a>
:   FIXME

**subdirectory**<a id="subdirectory"></a>
:   FIXME

**sustainable software**<a id="sustainable_software"></a>
:   Software that its users can afford to keep up to date. Sustainability depends on the quality of the software, the skills of the potential maintainers, and how much the community is willing to invest.

**tab completion**<a id="tab_completion"></a>
:   FIXME

**tag (in version control)**<a id="tag"></a>
:   FIXME

**test-driven development**<a id="tdd"></a>
:   FIXME

**test framework**<a id="test_framework"></a>
:   See [test runner](#test_runner).

**test runner**<a id="test_runner"></a>
:   FIXME

**three stickies**<a id="three_stickies"></a>
:   A technique for ensuring that everyone in a meeting gets a chance to speak. Everyone is given three sticky notes (or other tokens).  Each time someone speaks, it costs them a sticky; when they are out of stickies they cannot speak until everyone has used at least one, at which point everyone gets all of their stickies back.

**ticket**<a id="ticket"></a>
:   FIXME

**ticketing system**<a id="ticketing_system"></a>
:   FIXME

**tidy data**<a id="tidy_data"></a>
:   Tabular data that satisfies [three conditions](https://vita.had.co.nz/papers/tidy-data.pdf) that facilitate initial cleaning, and later exploration and analysis: (1) each variable forms a column, (2) each observation forms a row, and (3) each type of observation unit forms a table.

**timestamp**<a id="timestamp"></a>
:   FIXME

**tolerance**<a id="tolerance"></a>
:   FIXME

**transitive dependency**<a id="transitive_dependency"></a>
:   FIXME

**triage**<a id="triage"></a>
:   FIXME

**tuple**<a id="tuple"></a>
:   FIXME

**unit test**<a id="unit_test"></a>
:   FIXME

**up-vote**<a id="up_vote"></a>
:   FIXME

**update operator**<a id="update_operator"></a>
:   See [in-place operator](#in_place_operator).

**validation**<a id="validation"></a>
:   Checking that a piece of software does what its users want, i.e., "are we building the right thing"? See also: [verification](#verification)

**verification**<a id="verification"></a>
:   Checking that a piece of software works as intended, i.e., "did we build the thing right?" See also: [validation](#validation)

**version control system**<a id="version_control_system"></a>
:   A system for managing changes made to software during its development. See also: [Git](#git)

**virtual environment**<a id="virtual_environment"></a>
:   In Python, the `virtualenv` package allows you to create virtual, disposable, Python software environments containing only the packages and versions of packages you want to use for a particular project or task, and to install new packages into the environment without affecting other virtual environments or the system-wide default environment.

**virtual machine**<a id="virtual_machine"></a>
:   A program that pretends to be a computer.  This may seem a bit redundant, but VMs are quick to create and start up, and changes made inside the virtual machine are contained within that VM so we can install new packages or run a completely different operating system without affecting the underlying computer.

**whitespace**<a id="whitespace"></a>
:   The space, newline, carriage return, and horizontal and vertical tab characters that take up space but don't create a visible mark.  The name comes from their appearance on a printed page in the era of typewriters.

**wildcard**<a id="wildcard"></a>
:   FIXME

**working memory**<a id="working_memory"></a>
:   The part of memory that briefly stores information that can be directly accessed by consciousness.

