# Meeting: 2019-05-08

-   Time: 10:00-10:45 Eastern on 2019-05-08
-   Moderator: Madeleine Bonsma-Fisher

## Attendance
- Greg Wilson
- Joel Ostblom
- Elizabeth Wickes
- Madeleine Bonsma-Fisher

## Minutes

1. Proposal: have a single IDE for beginner Python that we use throughout the book
- Passed

- **Pros**:
  - consistency with R version
  - less confusing and removes ambiguity and choice for new people
  - allows helpful IDE features to be introduced immediately

- **Cons**:
  - not everyone will agree on the which IDE is best (includes book users)
  - if instructors want to use a different IDE, it’s a bit harder for them
  - as IDEs evolve (and popularity changes), book content may become more and more outdated.

- **Notes**:
  - Greg: many or most instructors will not feel confident choosing a tool, this will put extra unnecessary pressure on them. Instructors may also be novices.
  - Elizabeth: future-proofing: there will be two types of instructors: novices who want explicit instructions, and instructors who will have local influences that they need to adapt to. We can ride this line: provide good descriptive IDE-specific instructions, but also choose an IDE such that the features we highlight are future-proof. Write instructions so that an instructor could still adapt.

2. Proposal: take Jupyter off the table
- Passed

- **Pros**:
  - Jupyter doesn’t play nice with Git (even nbdime and reviewnb)
  - problematic to use with novices sometimes

- **Cons**:
  - we love Jupyter :(
  - it’s very popular

- **Notes**:
  - Elizabeth: chunk the code in the book, say in appendix or sidebar that you should run those chunks as cells in Jupyter.
  - Joel: how do you teach things like writing notes about plots as they come? Elizabeth: point out capabilities of Jupyter, and advise on how to do it in scripting version. 
  - We can revisit this later – we should definitely still talk about Jupyter a lot in the book. Joel volunteers to passionately write a Jupyter appendix.

3. Which IDE should we use?
- Top choices are Spyder and PyCharm
- Spyder pros: 
  - cell-based execution
  - comes with Anaconda: don’t have to download an extra thing, takes up less space
  - students who try it for the first time don’t mind it (from Elizabeth's assignments)
  - similar to Matlab and Rstudio
- Spyder cons:
  - resource intensive, uses a lot of RAM
- PyCharm pros:
  - students like it
  - it's an industry standard IDE
- PyCharm cons:
  - tricky to connect with Python - EW: "it's a 30-minute adventure to install PyCharm and Anaconda"
- We should recommend a cloud-based IDE for people who have installation failures or last-minute issues (i.e. Repl.it)
- Include notes and appendix with reasons why you'd want to differ from the core recommendation and choose a different IDE. 
- Passed: Spyder is the final choice
