# Meeting: 2019-05-13

-   Time: 17:00-18:00 Eastern on 2019-05-13
    -   <https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/meetingdetails.html?year=2019&month=5&day=13&hour=21&min=0&sec=0&p1=250&p2=234&p3=396&p4=69>
-   Venue: Zoom <https://zoom.us/j/9434606083>
-   Moderator: Madeleine Bonsma-Fisher

## Agenda

Please add more items as comments on this PR or by emailing Madeleine.

-   Introductions (5 min)

-   Proposal: use Spyder as the novice Python IDE
    ([#53](https://github.com/merely-useful/merely-useful.github.io/pull/53), 2 min, Elizabeth or Joel or Madeleine)

-   Proposal: survey our group about persona categories
    ([#60](https://github.com/merely-useful/merely-useful.github.io/issues/60),
    background [#8](https://github.com/merely-useful/merely-useful.github.io/issues/8), 5 min, Madeleine and Brandeis)

-   Discussion: choosing example datasets that will be used in parallel throughout book
    ([#14](https://github.com/merely-useful/merely-useful.github.io/issues/14), 10 min, various)

-   Discussion: should we work in forks or all in the one repo?
    ([#33](https://github.com/merely-useful/merely-useful.github.io/issues/33), 5 min, Greg)

-   Proposal: workflow for updates to existing chapters
    ([#50](https://github.com/merely-useful/merely-useful.github.io/issues/50), 5 min, Greg)

-   Proposal: agree on exercises before writing chapters
    ([#59](https://github.com/merely-useful/merely-useful.github.io/issues/59), 5 min, Greg)

-   Proposal: map out the two semesters
    ([#56](https://github.com/merely-useful/merely-useful.github.io/issues/56), 10 min, Damien)

-   Who wants to work on what content (10 min)
    -   Novice R ([#11](https://github.com/merely-useful/merely-useful.github.io/issues/11)): Luke, Kate, Charlotte
    -   Novice Python ([#12](https://github.com/merely-useful/merely-useful.github.io/issues/12)): Christina, Madeleine, Joel, Brandeis, Elizabeth
    -   Intermediate ([#13](https://github.com/merely-useful/merely-useful.github.io/issues/13)): Damien, Katy, Greg, Jonathan
    -   Uncommitted: Dhavide, Matt

-   Choose date and moderator for next meeting (5 min)

## Minutes

-   Attendees
    -   Madeleine Bonsma-Fisher (moderator)
    -   Greg Wilson (note taker)
    -   Brandeis Marshall
    -   Charlotte Wickham
    -   Joel Ostblom
    -   Jonathan Dursi
    -   Damien Irving
    -   Kate Hertweck
    -   Elizabeth Wickes
-   Use Zoom chat for votes
-   Use Spyder as IDE for Python (#53): all votes +1 or 0 - motion passes
-   Are we OK with doing a survey for personas? (#8 and #60): all votes +1 or 0 - motion passes
-   Include CO2 in example datasets (#14): all +1
    -   **Action on DI**: get datasets from three sites into consistent format
-   **Action on MBF**: look into AirBnB data and find out if we can use it (#14)
    -   Include discussion in book of how we figured out whether we could use the data
    -   Rely on Wayback Machine if necessary
    -   Vote: all +1
    -   **Action on GW**: help MBF
-   Use forks or use branches in one big repo (#33)?
    -   Preference is for forks
    -   Sub-proposal (EW): use wiki pages for agenda: passes
-   Adopt issue/PR workflow for revisions to chapter (#50): passes
-   Draft exercises before writing new chapters (#59): passes
    -   EW suggests recycling exercises from OER: general agreement
-   Map out the two semesters (#56): passes
-   Proposal: have book outlines and a dozen exercises by the next meeting (May 27): passes
-   Moderator for next meeting: Damien Irving
